From:	MN_DOT_Data Practices <datapractices.dot@state.mn.us>
Sent:	Friday, April 21, 2017 8:37 AM
To:	Webster, MaryJo
Cc:	Gutknecht, Kevin (DOT)
Subject:	RE: Request for bridge projects data

MnDOT has received your request and will begin processing it. Please contact me with any questions. 

Thank you.

Nicole Johnson 
Office of Chief Counsel
Data Practices Coordinator & Paralegal
Minnesota Department of Transportation
395 John Ireland Boulevard MS 140
St. Paul, MN 55155
Tel: 651-366-4816
nicole.johnson@state.mn.us  


From: Webster, MaryJo [mailto:MaryJo.Webster@startribune.com]  
Sent: Thursday, April 20, 2017 1:34 PM 
To: MN_DOT_Data Practices <datapractices.dot@state.mn.us> 
Subject: Request for bridge projects data

This is a request under the Minnesota Government Data Practices Act. 

I would like to request data on all bridge repair and/or replacement projects in Minnesota from August 
2007 to present (i.e. since the 35W collapse), including but not limited to fields of information on the 
following: old bridge number, new bridge number (if replaced), name of bridge, location information, 
date of completion, cost of project, source(s) of funding, and some sort of description of the work 
involved. If you have other fields of information readily available, please include those, as well. 

I would prefer the data be provided in a text-delimited file or any other format that can be imported to 
Excel or a database manager software. When the data is ready, please contact me and I can provide 
access to the Star Tribune’s FTP account for uploading. 

As a member of the media representing the public interest, I ask that any fees for this request be 
waived. However, if there will be any cost associated with fulfilling this request, please provide me an 
itemized estimate in advance so that I can get it approved by my supervisors. 

In discussing this request with Amber Blanchert, she indicated that it could take up to six weeks to fulfill 
this request – which is okay. In order to meet my story deadline, it would be helpful if I have the data no 
later than mid-June. 

Please don’t hesitate to contact me with questions at this email or the office phone number below. 

Thank you.

MaryJo Webster 
Data Editor 
office: 612-673-1789 
cell: 651-491-6576 
maryjo.webster@startribune.com 
Star Tribune Building | 650 3rd Ave S, Suite #1300 | Minneapolis, MN | 55488
 
 
 

